the lining of the gut is only one cell
thick
and they're all kind of held together
with what are called tight junctions a
locked arm and arm like a game we played
red rover red rover that kids don't play
anymore
so
the bacteria are
foreign if you will and there is an
interaction with the bacteria in the gut
and what this model shows is that as
those bacteria begin to break holes in
the gut break down the gut then you can
show that that is when aging starts and
the more the wall breaks down the faster
you age
so
what happens is if we damage this lining
and boy do we damage the snow hining
swallow and ibuprofen it's like
swallowing a hand grenade
takes some food with roundup in it
roundup will destroy the lining of your
gut it's really good stuff
roundup in itself will destroy your
bacterial population
everybody welcome to health theory
today's episode is round two with the
extraordinary dr stephen gundry he's the
new york times best-selling author of
the plant paradox and most recently the
longevity paradox he's also an
award-winning renowned heart surgeon and
researcher as well as the former
president of the american heart
association but the crazy part of his
story is that he left the profession he
built his entire career around at the
height of his success when he realized
he was just dealing with symptoms and
not addressing the underlying causes of
those symptoms and that's where i want
to start today your book kicks right off
with the myths of aging yeah i want to
believe that we can sort of age in
reverse and we can get stronger
better looking
more robust as we age but that is not
conventional wisdom
but you debunk it right off the bat yeah
hit us with it we want to be a benjamin
button you know
we want to actually de-age and i really
think it's possible in fact when people
look
at my pictures
really at the height of my surgical
career
in the mid-90s and then
compare those pictures to me now
there's actually
no doubt that i'm actually a younger man
than i was
almost 30 years ago better skin
like what are we judging that by better
skin
better you know better texture my skin
one of the things i talk about in the
book extensively is your your skin
is actually a mirror of the lining of
your gut your the lining of your gut
which is the surface of a tennis court
is actually your skin
turned inside out what is it that makes
you think that the gut is so influential
in aging specifically because people
think of like i'm going to get arthritis
it's wear and tear just is what it is
i've used my joints so much that you
know they're they're going to be tapped
out like it it actually does make
intuitive sense and so
what you talk about in the book is it
really sort of kicks people into a new
way of thinking about it so why is the
gut so tied to what we think of as
actual aging so
uh
here's the deal
there's a there's a wonderful
animal model for aging that involves a
little worm
called c elegans
it only lives about three weeks so you
can do an intervention in it and
kind of instantly know what's going to
happen and
so in this model
the
influence of the bacteria
microbiome
and the wall of this little creature's
gut
the
the lining of the gut is only one cell
thick
and they're all kind of held together
with what are called tight junctions a
locked arm and arm like a game we played
red rover red rover that kids don't play
anymore
so
the bacteria
are
foreign if you will and there is an
interaction with the bacteria in the gut
and what this model shows is that as
those bacteria begin to break holes in
the gut break down the gut
then you can
show that that is when aging starts and
the more the wall breaks down the faster
you age so let's uh break down what is
aging exactly like what are we so i
think most people would sort of go to
mobility
aesthetics
and maybe accumulation of disease like
how would you define aging specifically
so aging to me is the either quick or
slow breakdown of the gut wall
how do we know that well we can take a
look at
105 year old people around the world
you can look at their microbiome the
collection of bugs in their gut
they will have a very diverse set of
bugs they'll have you know
it takes a village this really
incredible tropical rainforest
and those microbiome that collection
will be identical to a healthy 30 year
old
so what that says is that these healthy
105 year olds are healthy
because
they have the microbiome of a 30 year
old and it's this microbiome that is not
attacking the wall of their gut that's
actually
existing with the wall of the gut and we
i talk a lot about this crazy bug that
may be the key to longevity and it's got
a great name acromancia mucinophilia
say that three times say that once yeah
so this bug lives in a mucous layer that
uh aligns our gut
and if we're lucky and the way we're
designed we're supposed to have a layer
of mucus lining our gut before we get to
the cells
and that mucus is there to number one
trap my favorite subject lectins which
are plant proteins that are looking for
sugar molecules
and number two it's to protect the wall
of the gut
from bacteria that might do us harm
so acromancia lives in the mucous layer
and it actually eats the mucus now
here's the best part the more mucus it
eats
the more our gut cells produce mucus
and it actually increases the mucous
layer and
the book is actually lots of tricks on
how to make this guy happy because the
thicker our mucus the younger we are
in fact fun fact
metformin we now know works
by increasing the amount of acrimoncia
in our gut not by some magical mystical
thing happening in our body
in fact interestingly about 25 of people
when they start metformin get diarrhea
and
it's actually because the gut microbiome
changes dramatically on on metformin and
one of the reasons is that acromoncia
becomes predominant
interesting so at a cellular level
what's happening with metformin
something that simply triggers the body
to produce
mucus in general is it is it changing
the microbiome you called it a rain
forest earlier is it changing the makeup
of that rainforest or is it just
actually compelling the body to create
more mucus
no i think it's actually changing it's
selecting out for ackermancia now how
does it do that because there's actually
kind of a shag carpeting on the lining
of our gut
so
plants have roots going into the ground
yep we know the roots actually absorb
nutrients because of the soil microbiome
all the bacteria all the fungi
actually deliver the nutrients into the
roots of the plant
well
we have a root system and that root
system is this shag carpet
that makes the the lining where i got a
tennis court okay so the reason it's so
big in surface area is it loops around
itself with little one cells thick
protrusions called microvilli okay okay
these are our roots they literally are
our roots
at the bottom of these microvilli or
what are called
crips at the bottom of the crips there
is a pocket of
bacteria that are essential
and they're down there
in storage in fact fun fact we now know
the appendix is not useless it's one of
these storage systems to repopulate our
gut if you lose your appendix you're
screwed for that part of your story
system but down at the bottom of these
crips are these little collection of
bacteria and at the bottom of these
crypts are our stem cells that actually
repopulate
these microvilli
so
what happens is if we damage this lining
and boy do we damage the snow lining
swallow and ibuprofen it's like
swallowing a hand grenade
take some food with roundup in it
roundup will destroy the lining of your
gut uh it's really good stuff
roundup in itself will destroy your
bacterial population all right really
fast because i think this is important
and for some reason um
even though i've had you on the show
before i really read the book like the
way that you've started talking about
some of the places that you're going to
find also known as glyphosate
in the system that basically they're
part of why they're doing it was
originally created as a um or patented
as a antibiotic which that was already
shocking and then you said they use it
as a way to be able to dry the crops out
so they can harvest them on a specific
day very good but then you said they
don't no one wipes them off and so it
ends up in cheerios and other things and
i was like what like i thought
if i was washing my vegetables i was
going to be fine so this was a little
bit startling to me yeah you know you
know a little off subject but they've
looked at recently a study of 35 oat
products in the united states and all of
them had glyphosate in them some of them
are very high levels some of our
breakfast cereals most of our granolas
most of our granola bars
most california wines including a couple
of organic wines have glyphosate in them
because the the fields are
sprayed the weeds are sprayed with
glyphosate between the vines to kill the
weeds
research at mit has shown that not only
does glyphosate
kill bacteria
because bacteria use the same
reproductive pathway that plants use
it's the shikha mate pathway humans
don't use the shikamate pathway and so
monsanto
when they invented it said hey
uh this kills plants but don't worry it
doesn't kill humans because we don't use
the same pathway for life
and everybody said oh that's great you
know this is a miracle
uh what they didn't tell anybody is the
bacteria used the same shikha pathway
and again they patented this as an
antibiotic they didn't patent it as an
herbicide
what else are people doing that is um
breaking the bonds or killing the
bacteria the antibiotics in their food
or that they're taking themselves in
fact study just out this morning
shows that women who take antibiotics
just you know because urinary tract
infection
sore throat
uh have a much higher incidence of heart
disease than women who don't that's
scary now this gets into something in
your book that was super freaky uh
i've never heard somebody say and i'm
not saying that no man has ever said i
had never heard anybody say until
reading this that um heart disease is an
autoimmune disease yeah
so because it ties into this point
how is heart disease autoimmune disease
how does that start in the gut what is
that whole chain reaction okay
so um michael debakey one of the
premier originators of heart surgery
from houston texas would always say that
cholesterol has nothing to do with
causing heart disease
that it's an innocent bystander
that literally gets
sucked into
inflammation at the wall of the blood
vessel
and i use the example of let's say you
know i'm an alien
and i'm you know circling above la and i
report back that i'm pretty sure that
ambulances cause car accidents
because every time i see a car accident
there's an ambulance there and the
ambulance must have caused it well
you know causation association is not
causation so the fact that we see
cholesterol in
deposits and i see it you know every day
in the operating room there's
cholesterol in these plaques doesn't
mean that the cholesterol caused the
plaque
so
i learned this
as an infant heart transplant surgeon
what we found was we thought
naively that if we got these hearts in
as a newborn that the immune system of
the newborn
would not be mature enough and would say
oh yeah that you know that's my heart
i don't know any better and it wouldn't
attack it well we were partially right
but as the years went and we studied
these kids they started to get
uh coronary artery disease their blood
vessels got
thicker and thicker that is super
interesting and we're going
what the heck
so did they look just like somebody who
we would have associated with too much
cholesterol in their diet it looks just
like diabetic coronary arteries
interesting just like it and so when you
actually look at the blood vessels
the kids the lining of the blood vessel
is from the donor from a foreigner
the blood going through is from the kid
and
the blood says wait a minute these are
foreign cells
and
they're i'm going to attack them just
think of a splinter under your finger
you you know it gets all red
so that's inflammation and what was
happening was then
cholesterol was basically coming as a
patch an ambulance and it was getting
caught up in this inflammation
so then we look at these adults who
obviously don't have heart transplants
and you go
well that's funny this looks just like a
kid
who has you know somebody else's heart
and there's a attack on the blood
vessels that looks identical as if that
was a foreign object
so that got
me going you know this is an immunologic
reaction and
in just a few weeks and i can't tell you
the paper because it's embargoed i'm
giving a paper at the american heart
association
vascular biology meeting
that makes a pretty good case
that
lectins which are a foreign protein
that can stick to sugar molecules on the
surface of blood vessels
are the cause of atherosclerosis in
humans and that removing lectins
reduces the markers for that all right
really fast then we talked about this in
our first issue or our first episode but
i think it bears repeating like what's
the real quick uh breakdown of lectins
and the the rhetoric you started using
around kidney beans i found really
interesting
yes so lectins are the plant defense
system one of the plant defense system
i'm pretty dug on a good one plants do
not want to be eaten they don't want
their babies eaten and they have
evolutionary pressures to keep being
eaten and have their babies not being
eaten and
lectins are one of the ways to do this
they are sticky proteins that
look for specific sugar molecules to
stick to
and that incites an inflammatory
response wherever they stick
we talked about joints wearing out
joints do not come with a sell-by date
or use by date
there is no evidence that the wear and
tear theory has anything to do with a
human body we can constantly rebuild
cartilage but like i talk about in the
book
cartilage is broken down by certain
cells and rebuilt by other cells and we
can
if you had arthritis we could stick a
scope in you suck out some of the fluid
we could actually find bacterial
particles in your joint fluid wow okay
so really fast because i know where
you're going with that but now now
connect those dots how did those parts
get into the joint lectins broke down
the wall of your gut and on the other
side of your gut is 65 of all your white
blood cells 65 of your immune system is
lining your gut
what are they doing there because the
gut is where the outside world gets
through and they're there
to sound the high alert and attack them
when they get through
one of the reasons we store fat in our
gut one of the reasons we have a beer
belly or a wheat belly
is
we are actually putting fat down where
the action is it's to supply the troops
that's why we put it there in fact when
i operate on people with advanced
coronary disease there is a layer of fat
that is on the surface of the blood
vessels
and there is a perfect correlation
to the amount of inflammation and
disease in the blood vessel with the
amount of fat surrounding the blood
vessel whoa this is in humans published
studies so we this is not conjecture and
i reference this in all my books
wow okay so here's my understanding of
fat 45 seconds ago which may now be
changing
um
one that fat is essentially an organ but
i think of it as an energy storage unit
that we can certainly access and and
break down and turn it into energy uh
that the body is very efficient at
burning ketones certainly the brain
so
what exactly is it doing at these areas
of inflammation so maybe 15 years ago we
thought the fat was actually causing the
inflammation because wherever we found
fat there were lots of white blood cells
what i think recent information is
proven is that the fat is not the evil
guy that we thought it was that the fat
is there
because of the inflammation and the
inflammation is there because you have a
leak in your gut you have a leaky gut
your white blood cells require huge
amounts of energy to do their job okay
and so you it just it's just like any
army you got to have a supply line you
have to have food for the troops all
right now let me ask a really difficult
question i have no idea if this even
makes sense but it makes sense to my
layman's mind
so many people
have gotten to a metabolic point of
dysfunction so extreme that they really
never access their fat stores
so if they're existing in that state and
they have metabolic syndrome and the
body's like yo here's the fat take it i
we have inflammation get ready white
blood cells you can have all the energy
that you could ever use
but the body doesn't know how to click
over into that mechanism because insulin
levels are elevated is the fat getting
there and the white blood cells are
unable to use it or that's a whole
different thing and they're still able
to use it that's part of the problem
that's part of the problem
yeah let me use an example i used to use
with my patients
the the flu virus
so the virus has a
has a bar code on it that our immune
cells scan literally and say oh you know
that's a nasty virus that's the flu
virus we know this guy
we need to get ready to attack this and
we need to get all of our immune system
up and running and we need to make sure
the immune system has enough power to do
this so what do we do we actually make
you me
hurt
hurt to move because if we move the
muscles are going to take all the energy
if you
lay down then all the energy is
available for this battle to go after
this virus
our immune system literally reads
barcodes to tell whether somebody's a
friend or a foe
and lectins have fascinating bar codes
that
mimic
other
proteins in our body and when
this immune system is ramped up the
immune system goes around the body and
looks for proteins that
are lectins
and let's say they come to a thyroid
and they go oh my gosh you know this
poor woman's thyroid is full of what
appear to be lectins they're not quite
the same but it's close enough and we
should you know shoot to kill and we'll
ask questions later okay so i'm gonna
i'm gonna walk through the process that
we've just discussed because wow for me
anyway and for anybody listening that's
like me
once i can picture it once i can
understand it then it's like i can begin
to manipulate it and predict what i
should do and not do
okay so
you eat something it could be lectins
which you'll find in the skin and seeds
of nightshade vegetables is one example
or peanuts or peanuts
so you eat these things they like a
glyphosate like
ibuprofen apparently they will go in and
they'll disrupt
my microbiome they break down the single
the bonds between the single cell lining
of my gut that allows either entire
elements of proteins in the case of
lectins or
pieces of bacteria yep i'm assuming
dying pieces dead pieces of broken arms
bacteria it turns out when
bacteria divide and they do all the time
i mean there's trillions and trillions
and trillions of them you make about
anywhere from a half a pound to a pound
of
dead cell wall bacterias every day
and so
those pieces are normally excreted with
your poop um most of your poop is
actually bacteria that's so weird yeah
that's what it is so anyhow our immune
system is so afraid of bacteria they're
supposed to stay on their side of the
wall
that
if they see the
signature of that bacterial cell wall
it doesn't know that it's not a whole
bacteria doesn't know that it's dead
so we can take in human volunteers
lps's
dead bacteria inject them into your
bloodstream
and you will go into septic shock whoa
as if we put living bacteria in you
whoa because what's actually happening
is my immune system is going crazy
exactly the immune system doesn't know
any better it's a holy cow you know
there's there's
thousands and millions of bacteria all
of a sudden in us and
you know we got to do something and they
just start attacking ah like crazy
monkeys going nuts yeah exactly
and so those particles whether they're
the lectins which by the way on lectins
really fast the whole notion of thinking
about plants not as these inert things
which until starting to read you i
always did i just thought of plants is
completely inert when you talk about
them as being sort of the world's most
sophisticated chemical warfares that's
where it's like whoa then you begin to
realize maybe what's really going on
okay so these lectins or particles of
bacteria get into the bloodstream immune
system scans it maybe they've ended up
in the thyroid maybe elsewhere and it
just [__] goes nuts starts attacking
you get inflammation which has a whole
host of knock-on effects from
could be
cholesterol trying to patch could be
the fat wrapping around the blood
vessels or the arteries or whatever the
case may be and you know we're we're now
most of us are now convinced that
alzheimer's and parkinson's and dementia
is
neuroinflammation okay
and what's and what people are picking
up on because they're all going to talk
about the beta amyloid plaques and
you've talked about how some of the
companies targeting that may actually be
accelerating your onset of dementia
which is really terrifying really bad um
is that this is again the alien blaming
the ambulance for car accidents yeah so
most amyloid is actually produced by
bacteria in the gut
and dale bredesen keeps saying he says
it's not the amyloid in the brain that
we should be looking at and
no wonder 40 billion dollars of
investment in anti-amyloid drugs has
been a total and useless failure 40
billion dollars he says because amyloid
is produced in the gut by bacteria and
we know certain bacteria that make it
and certain that don't and why would we
give the amyloid producing bacteria what
they want to eat which is simple sugars
and saturated fats the western diet
plus the amyloid can't get out of the
gut unless your gut is leaky it's too
big a protein to be absorbed
so dale
and i for years have been saying hey
guys you're looking at the wrong spot
to go after alzheimer's so really fast
let me ask are you saying that beta
amyloid plaques are not actually created
in the brain and that they would never
make their way to the brain you won't
make them unless they get to the brain
and then stimulate more production
that's so weird why would the brain have
the ability to produce something in the
brain that would never be turned on
unless it started from a problem in the
gut that seems way counterintuitive it's
basically
so we now we now know we have
we have a leaky brain and there's
increased meaning things are crossing
the blood-bearing barrier
that would have never done it and
there's actually a beautiful new paper
that probably explains why
cholesterol
and amyloid and dementia actually
coexist
in people with the apoe4 gene
they quote alzheimer's gene
i got interested in apple e4 which 30 of
people carry
as a heart surgeon because it causes
heart disease and dale bredesen got
interested in it because it causes
dementia alzheimer's
and lo and behold we now know there's an
intimate connection
between
carrying the apple e4 gene and how
cholesterol can be mischievous to you
and your brain and not necessarily
somebody who doesn't carry that gene
what is the apoe gene what is it doing
great question so it's a it's a carrier
molecule
of among other things cholesterol and
if you carry
a 4 mutation
or a double 4 mutation
you do statistically have an increased
risk of developing alzheimer's you also
have an increased risk of developing
heart disease
because it's doing because it changes
the way cholesterol is transported
interesting it's more efficient it's so
it's getting more ambulances to the
scene it's actually worse
let's suppose
the apple e4 is a subway
and it's carrying cholesterol
and it stops at a subway saw stop and
cholesterol gets off and it goes into
the cell does its thing and the cell
says okay i've got plenty thanks a lot
you can take the rest of the cholesterol
back and take it someplace else
so it gets back on the subway and the
subway moves on
with the apoe4 gene
what happens is
it carries the cholesterol to the cell
on the subway but when the extra
cholesterol tries to get back in the
subway doors are closed
super clear all right
and that's the problem you know this is
a transport problem it's dropping stuff
off just fine but normally it'd be
picking up the stuff that you know isn't
needed but it so it builds up
yeah so it's kind of a double whammy
this is so interesting to me it's crazy
uh we have a lot of ground to cover here
so one i want to talk about fecal
microbial transplants which are really
interesting so i think we have sort of a
really basic understanding um your book
goes into a lot of detail so people
should definitely check it out because
it's so interesting the more that i
understand this stuff but we have a
basic understanding so far in the time
that we've had together today
now
how can fecal microbial transplant help
with that why does that work
and why didn't it get widespread
adoption so back in the 70s when broad
spectrum antibiotics came out they they
were truly miracle drugs because before
that
we had to
actually
culture a bacteria
find out what antibiotic it was
sensitive to and then give that
antibiotic you know
and that would take oh gosh 48 72 hours
to do
when broad spectrum antibiotics were
invented
it was you know it was a shotgun
approach no worry well you know we don't
have to know what you have uh here take
this we're gonna wipe out everything
which was great in a lot of ways but
what we didn't know
was that we also wiped out every last
living bacteria for the most part in our
gut
and we were so naive back then that we
didn't realize that that microbiome was
incredibly important
and so we
developed a lot of people all of a
sudden with what was then called
pseudomembranous enter colitis
it's now called c difficile
clostridium difficile and so these guys
got horrible infections in the lining of
their gut
and nobody had any treatment for it
these people were dying in hospitals
after getting broad spectrum antibiotics
and we're going what the heck
so uh my one of my mentors who is the
chairman of the department of surgery at
the medical college of georgia in
augusta
um
said you know
this has got to be
we've wiped out
most of the bacteria in the gut and this
is an ecosystem where there are checks
and balances
so all of a sudden now we've wiped out
most of the checks and balances and
there's probably a rogue
bacteria that's taken over it's party
time you know so clever party time so he
says
we got to get you know good stuff back
and he said where are we going to get
that and he starts looking around at the
medical students true story
and he said you know medical students
they're pretty healthy
so once a week
this is the mid-1970s
they would pass around this plastic
bucket it was called the honey pot and
we'd take it into the john and take a
crap you know you actually had to hold
it you know
get to school and you know take a crap
and he'd take it to his lab and i'll
never forget we had wearing blenders you
know
and homogenize all this medical student
poop and put it in enema bags
and give these people fecal enemas this
is in the 70s and
he would have before and after pictures
and he'd go to meetings and show you
know this horrible inflammation this
horrible infection in the colons and
then a week later it's pristine it's
beautiful you know people are singing
kumbaya inside the colon
and and everybody goes oh he's making
this stuff up that can't happen
and so people
did not believe it because
we had no idea no one had sequenced the
human microbiome that was really only
five years ago
well now since the sequencing of the
human microbiome
it's you know you go
well of course you know there were ten
thousand different species of bacteria
in in you and me in fact a month ago
they found another thousand
and normally there are beautiful checks
and balances but it's when these checks
and balances get disturbed
by
taking a round of antibiotics or as
simply as eating meat where the
chicken or the pork or the beef was
given antibiotics
you know when we eat that they have
residual antibiotics in them and we eat
the antibiotics
talk to me about the hollom hollow body
polo biome yeah
yeah
so there are a number of researchers
that think we should use
holobiome
rather than microbiome microbiome pretty
much
attempts to define the bugs that are
living in our gut right
we have an oral microbiome and we
actually have a cloud
of bacteria that live in the air around
us
and there is this theory which i really
do like
that our personal space is actually
determined when
your holobiome your cloud bumps up
against mine dude that would be so weird
if that's true well i mean because you
feel something like yeah yeah you feel
that yeah
and there's certain people that you're
you're allowing in closer right and it
gets so twilight zoning that i you know
i always play that music in my head we
know that kissing for instance is a
universal
human grade ape and often animal
characteristic
and there's some pretty cool wacky
suggestion that i really like
that kissing you are exchanging your
oral microbiome and your
bacteria
are actually deciding if your
person next to you is compatible with
them you've heard of that whole study
where they have women just smell these
t-shirts and rank them in order of
desirability and the women are like i
have no idea why you're making me do
this but they put them in order of most
genetic diversity or difference from
their own to uh most similar to their
own yeah that's
surreal yeah
and women
you know and i i say this as often as
anyone will say
women have a gut feeling
far better than men
and that is because women actually are
far better capable
of listening to their microbiome and i
get kind of deep into the fact
that
our microbiome is inherited from our
mother we get it from our mother
and all of the mitochondria the little
energy producing organelles in us
are actually engulfed bacteria
that
are inherited from our mother and they
have their own separate dna and their
maternal dna and there is now
actually very good evidence
that the bacteria in our microbiome
communicate
via text messages that now have been
measured
to mitochondria
their sisters
and
about how things are going in
the the body and the outside world
it's so crazy so
and so
women trust your gut yeah
uh going back to the microbiome coming
from your mother
um i've become
probably a little like oversteppy like i
normally like hey whatever you want to
do until i hear somebody um saying that
oh i i have a planned c-section so look
if you need one obviously get one jesus
absolutely but if you don't need one i'm
like make sure that you smear the baby
in the vaginal fluid at a minimum and
people always like whoa
but
just trying to
pass that microbiome on and you said
there was a recent study that came out
about autism and fecal microbial
transplants and how the link between a
successful maybe the wrong word
microbiome and an unsuccessful one can
manifest as autism talk to me about that
study
yeah there's
um
we've known for
actually a long time since
the microbiome was
identified and sequenced
and we know that number one kids with
autism have
a lot more irritable bowel and they have
a lot more gi issues and they actually
have a very different microbiome than
quote normal
and there's been a suggestion for years
that maybe it is that microbiome that is
contributing
not going to say cause
autism
there's even more exciting work in
gynecology and obstetrics that
there might there is a microbiome in the
vagina that we know about but there is a
microbiome of the placenta
itself and there's some actually
exciting work that
perhaps the microbiome of the placenta
is the most important in terms of
educating the
neonate the fetus is immune system do
you only encounter that as
um you're actually born and you go
through it during so the whole time
you're washing it then why would a
c-section be so problematic well so one
of the theories of autism is that this
is an in-utero problem that happened to
the kid before he was born or she was
born the reasons i say he is the boys
have it far more than girls
and that now there is
interesting evidence that
we should be working on the maternal
microbiome during before pregnancy
and certainly during pregnancy we need
to start early in
making sure the microbiome is right so
getting back to autism
there was a recent study just published
and
don't quote me on the exact details but
it comes out of australia
and because of this connection
with autistic kids having funny bowels
and a funny microbiome
they with an institutional review board
permission did oral fecal transplants in
a large number of autistic kids
and they did this for about six weeks
almost immediately
50 percent of the autism symptoms
subsided
fifty percent
and the paper has now followed these
kids for two years
and the fifty percent reduction in
symptoms has
continued wow
and if that doesn't make the case
that
you know the gut and the microbiome has
such an incredible effect on the brain
i don't know what does no kidding now
that we know that and your your book
goes into great detail including recipes
and all kinds of stuff what's a quick
overlay of lifestyle and dietary choices
that people should make if they want to
die young at a ripe old age as the sub
headline of the book goes
so
we know that there are ways to give
these good guys like eckhermancia what
they like to eat
and they love resistant starches they
love tubers like yams like jikama like
taro root like yucca or yucca
they love
mushrooms and there's a beautiful recent
study out of
south asia of people basically having a
90 reduction in alzheimer's if you eat
two cups of mushrooms a week
what so there is this incredible
compound in mushrooms
uh i'll probably fracture it ergo
theonine thionine
that actually crosses the
blood-brain barrier
better than
turmeric curcumin
and actually protects
against neural inflammation
and it turns out that mushrooms
absolutely positively feed these
friendly bacteria
and mushrooms contain this compound
called spermidine
it's a polyamine that study after study
shows promotes longevity okay so those
are some of the things also
inulin-containing compounds
so inulin is present in chicory now you
can buy inulin made out of yaekon root
and any store as a sweetener
so inulin feeds acromancia and so it's
present in chicory it's present in
radicchio belgian endive
jerusalem artichokes sunchokes they're
just pure inulin so
the more of this stuff you eat
the more of this bug you're going to
grow
so that's number one so eat for them
number two
exercise
beautiful study in women
women have more alzheimer's disease than
men and
so
you look at an exercise program in women
women who exercise regularly routinely
kind of from mid-life on
have a 90 reduction in alzheimer's whoa
and compared to women who don't exercise
routine
and in the women who are going to get
alzheimer's
it's 11 years later than if they didn't
exercise so i mean think about that if
we had a drug
that had a 90 reduction in alzheimer's
yeah how much would we pay for that you
know you and i would be
popping that every day
uh we wouldn't have 40 billion dollars
wasted on amyloid drugs
but it's available by housework by
gardening by getting a dog and walking
it twice okay that's interesting so when
you say housework why do you say that i
think people will be confused by that it
turns out that
give me an example my my mother
actually scrubbed her floors until the
day she died at 90. 90
even though there were swifters and
things like that and she did it as an
exercise program
exercise
changes the gut microbiome
to a friendly microbiome meditation
yoga changes the gut microbiome seems
impossible it's so interesting that
they're in a two-way communication yeah
yeah it literally and there's there's
even some really cool stuff that yoga
postures
actually move
this microbiome around in your gut and
they actually get signals probably
electrical signals
so all these
chakras that you know in eastern
medicine it's probably all this part of
this
really amazing communication system that
western medicine is just going oh come
on that's all voodoo
because we couldn't measure it before
yeah
so exercise is really important
lastly
i really want people to have a brain
wash day at least once a week
so
in the last couple of years we've
learned
that there is a
lymph system in the brain called the
glymphatic system
and it no one actually believed it
existed but now it exists and the brain
actually in deep sleep which happens
very early in the sleep cycle goes
through a literal wash cycle
it shrinks by about 20 percent and all
of these toxins like amyloid like tau
like bad pieces of protein are actually
squeezed out of the brain like wringing
out a sponge
and it happens in deep sleep and happens
early in the sleep cycle
so we have to have a lot of blood flow
to our brain to do that the brain uses
huge amounts of blood flow but we have
to have even more
so the evidence is that you need about a
three or four hour window
before the last meal of your day before
you go to sleep
why because digestion is actually really
energy expensive so we put huge amounts
of blood flow down into our gut
if you eat near the time you go to bed
that blood flow is down in your
intestines and it doesn't go up to your
brain
so there's actually a recent study of
men who had
unstable angina or heart attack
and they followed those men who ate late
at night
had a much higher incidence of a new
engine or new heart heart attack and so
they're all really actually
interconnected so
one day a week i ask people
finish your last meal at six o'clock if
you go to bed at say 10 right if it's 11
finish it at seven do not snack before
bedtime
and allow yourself to have a brainwash
better yet skip a meal
and that gets in probably to the fourth
point
you've got to have periods of extended
lengths of time between eating
we
were supposed to go prolonged periods of
time before our next meal
and break fast we've talked about this
before it ruins your you know your
morning stuff
was you break your fast and there's no
definition of when you know it's
supposed to be breakfast
that was from the dear old kellogg's
cornflake company telling people they
had to eat breakfast um
yeah
yeah that the whole
lifestyle that you just painted like
makes all the sense in the world like
when you start looking at the research
even just like
so one i can certainly speak to the
anti-inflammatory properties of a lot of
things that you're talking about um
which that has been revolutionary in my
life intermittent fasting has had a
whole host of benefits for me
anecdotally and then certainly i think
there's a lot of data backing things up
you've talked a lot about how eating is
just an excuse to get olive oil in your
mouth man i hope you're right about that
one because i have really um taken that
to heart and there does seem to be some
pretty tremendous benefits to that um
it's it's really pretty extraordinary
yeah i mean it really is um you know and
i i show a lot of studies i think the
probably the best one
is the predimed study out of spain where
just simplistically they took 65 year
old people divided them into three
groups
one they all eat a mediterranean diet
spain
one group had to use a liter of olive
oil per week the second group had to eat
the equivalent calories in walnuts
primarily the third group had a low-fat
mediterranean diet followed for five
years
the initial study was look at memory
the olive oil group and the walnut group
had improved memory after five years
the low-fat group lost memory
the
people in all groups with known coronary
artery disease or stroke the olive oil
group had a 30 reduction in new events
the
low-fat group had an increase of
continued events
so this stuff is miraculous
it actually grows neurons the
polyphenols in olive oil and here's
another crazy fun fact now there's a
chemical that i talk about called tmao
discovered by the cleveland clinic tmao
is made by our gut bacteria primarily
from animal proteins particularly
choline and carnitine cholines and egg
yolks we need choline for our brain but
our gut bacteria love it
they make it out of these and tmao
damages blood vessels
do the cleveland clinics credit
they said
well wait a minute the mediterranean
diet seems to be very good for
preventing heart disease and yet these
guys eat fish they you know they eat
cheeses they eat salamis
what gives
so they actually discovered that there
are polyphenols in certain olive oils
balsamic vinegar and red wine
that paralyze these enzyme systems in
the bacteria it doesn't kill the
bacteria paralyzes the enzymes so you
could eat all the choline and carnitine
you want but you will not make tmao
so
olive oil balsamic vinegar make a
spritzer of balsamic vinegar and
sparkling water yeah you got me on that
yeah and i have a glass of red wine and
so you will prove you'll you can still
have your
you know your meat and eat it too
much i like that all right tell people
where they can find your book
uh anywhere on amazon.com
barnesandnoble.com
audible i actually did the audible of
this book uh so if you want to hear my
voice longer and longer
i read the book
uh
you can
find it at gundry md you can find me at
drgundry.com
come to my youtube channel i've got a
podcast the dr henry podcast i'm on
instagram facebook
um
what's the one change that people could
make that would have the biggest impact
on their longevity
the one change and i you know i get on
my soapbox is you got to get your
vitamin d level up
take at least 5 000 ius of vitamin d
a day a day the university of california
san diego has shown that the average
american to have an adequate vitamin d
level should have 9 600 international
units a day the average american whoa
if you look at cancer patients they
almost always have a low vitamin d every
one of my patients with autoimmune
disease walks through the door with a
low vitamin d
if you look at if you like the telomere
theory of aging where the little caps on
the end of chromosomes and it's a good
theory of agent
the higher your vitamin d level the
longer your telomeres are interesting
and vitamin d getting back to those
little crips down in the down in our
shag carpet
those stem cells actually have to be
stimulated to move by vitamin d and if
you don't have vitamin d they will sit
there and you will have a leaky gut
there it is that's number one number two
take time to release vitamin c
twice a day or chew a 500 milligram
vitamin c four times a day
we're one of the few animals that don't
produce vitamin c and you've got to have
it for so many functions particularly if
women
they have to know that collagen will not
repair all their wrinkles without
vitamin c
awesome
thank you so much that was really
fantastic guys please
everything that this man talks about is
extraordinary i find it wildly educating
i said this in the last episode i'll say
it again there's something about the way
that he explains it that i find uniquely
capable of allowing me to understand
things in their totality to follow the
bouncing ball all the way through so
that i can understand what to do in my
own life on a predictive model and he
also especially in the book goes into
great detail about things you can do
recipes all kinds of amazing stuff so be
sure to check it out alright if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential